So how about we go into, let's go into
the page here, the homepage here.
And I'm just gonna add,
I wanna add one of these.
It looks really cool.
So I'm gonna add one of
those in the homepage.
I think it's one of these divs here.
Let me just collapse these.
Yeah, it's just one of these divs.
I'm just gonna copy this div,
just add it underneath it.
And I'm just gonna get rid of
this anchor tag, and instead,
I'm gonna add, actually, yeah,
let's make it a div, I guess.
So let's make it a div.
And get rid of that, rid of that.
So now if I wanted to navigate
this programmatically,
I must have copied way more than just one.
[LAUGH] Yeah, I added a bunch of them.
>> You got the row, it's all good.
>> I copied the whole row.
That's funny.
Let me just delete that, that's confusing.
There we go,
I'll just talk about it this way.
All right, so
if I wanted to route programmatically,
You have to understand what
a client component is, all right?
So remember I told you last time,
I was like,
you think this component is doing
something, but it's actually not.
So if anyone has used Node before,
I'm gonna do something and
you're gonna be like, what are you doing?
That looks crazy, okay, so,
What do you think would happen
if I try to import some Node
specific library into a React file?
What would you expect to happen?
Like file system.
>> Typescript will complain.
>> Typescript might complain,
let's see, import, fs from fs,
typescript says, that's cool, it's cool.
What do you think might
happen if I run this?
Lets see, so
if I go to contact, Come here.
I rendered, that's crazy.
How did I do that?
There's no fs on the browser.
Did it just get rid of it?
Did it bundle it out?
What's actually going on here, right?
So in Next.js 12,
what would happen is you had
the ability to do get server side props.
You can do stuff like this.
You can say export something like const
getServerSideProps here like this.
And then you can do all types
of Node.js stuff in here.
And you can import stuff at the top,
Node.js stuff, and you can use it in here.
And Next did a really good job
of splitting out your browser
code from the Node code up here and
down here.
It split it out and
made different bundles.
Okay, that's not what's happening here.
Because we don't have this code anymore,
you can't do this in the app directory.
It only works in the pages directory.
So what's actually happening here is that
these components are actually server
components.
They're not client components.
These components aren't
rendering on the browser at all.
They have no interactivity.
In fact, the JavaScript from these
components aren't even being shipped to
the browser.
It's just pure HTML.
So all the jobs here that we've written so
far in the app directory is not
being sent to the client at all.
But we still get to use React by default,
which is way different than if you did
create React app, whereas all that
JavaScript is gonna be in the browser.
It's also different than SSR, whereas you
would render it on the server, but then
the client will still pick up and match it
and take over, so the code is still there.
So this whole time,
we've been doing server components,
which you'll find out is really crazy.
So that's why we're able to do
something like the file system.
So there's nothing stopping me from
using a file system in here and
getting files in and
rendering them, yes, Mark.
>> These link components,
can we use nested relative routes?
So if you go to contact and you have
components underneath or whatever.
>> I see, they're relative to the root.
So the link components href is not
relative to where the link component is
written, they're relative
to the root of your app.
So it's always gonna be the root
of your app slash whatever.
So yeah, it's not relative
to where they're written.
Okay, yeah, so server components.
[LAUGH] We're gonna dive
into that a little more.
So I need to tell you that because
now if we want to use that router,
we have to say, you know what,
this is now, A client component.
We have to add this directive to the top.
I think this directive to the top of any
component makes it a client component,
which is a standard component that you've
been using with React pretty much forever.
But Next.js, by default, makes all the
components server components, all right?
So we got a client component here.
And then now we have a client component.
We can use, where is it?
This thing, the useRouter thing.
So we can do that.
We can come in here.
We can say useRouter.
We can get the router from useRouter,
like this.
And then now there's methods on here
like router.push, router.replace.
Those are the methods you
wanna use to navigate, right?
So if I had a button here,
I said button and
then onClick, like this, onClick,
I want to, Run this function like this.
It says router.push,
not prefetch, push, and go home.
And then I can say home.
Like that.
And if I go home, it goes home.
So that's the programmatic routing, but
you can only do that if
it's a client component.
Why do you think you can only
use a router that manipulates
a URL on the client component and
not a server component?
You might not know a lot about the two,
but think about the two different
environments they run in.
Yes.
>> My one guess is that when you
have the client component,
you can have access to the window.
>> Exactly.
>> Or object.
>> Yeah, you have access to the window.
This router thing, it's literally
using window.location, right?
It's window.location and
all this stuff on here to create a router.
That doesn't exist on the server,
so you can't.
It's like,
I don't know what to do with that.
So you have this client side router.
So yeah, there are times where
you have to do client side stuff,
and we'll get to that in more detail.
But yeah, the big reveal is you've been
writing server components the whole time,
and there's no JavaScript front end for
any of that for free, you did nothing.
It just happened, which I think is insane.
Because most of you can tell when
that happens, was like, this is just
some static thing, but no, you can't
really tell, so that was pretty powerful.
And the only thing Next.js did
there was enable that by default.
React is responsible for
server components.
That's something that they created.
They created this directive called
use client and all this stuff.
It's React that's making this stuff.
Next.js has adopted it really quickly and
it was like, let's turn it on
by default because you should have it by
default, default for free optimizations.
Opt out when you don't need it and
not the other way around.
So that's what they're doing.
>> You said the use client is new to
version 13 or that's been present.
>> It's new to React 18.
Yep, it's new to React 18, yeah.
Yeah, React documentation.
Next.js has really good documentation
on all of this, but React also has,
I think I have a link to it in here,
let's see.
Well, I think it's on the next slide.
I have a link to like the RFC where
all this was introduced, yeah, yes.
>> Scott, for client components,
are those never rendered on the server or
are those just also
rerendered on the client?
>> Good question, so
question was are client components
never rendered on server?
Here's where it gets confusing.
[LAUGH] So because Next.js also has
different rendering modes outside of
different types of components
as in they have static,
they have server side rendering,
and they have client rendering.
A client component can still be
rendered on the server through SSR.
But that is not the same
thing as a server component.
And we're gonna talk about
difference between the two.
So yes, our client component will still
need to make sure that it might pass
through a server environment at one point.
So hard coding window at the top of
your client file might actually break
versus putting it in a hook where it only
gets ran when it's actually in a browser.
So you still have to do stuff like that.
Is type of window undefined or
something like that, depending on the mode
that you're telling Next.js to do.
But that is not the same as a server
component that never touches the client.
And yeah,
it does something called streaming,
which is way different than what
server side rendering does.
Yeah, so the question was, I don't have
to make an entire page a client component
just because one thing in there needs
access to something on a client.
Instead, I can just make it the one thing,
in this case,
the button the client component,
and that's actually a fact.
Not only is it a fact that
is the recommended way.
That's called pushing the client
components far down the tree as you
possibly can to a leaf, make them leaf
components so that you can maintain.
If you think about anything that's
a server component never gets shipped to
the browser.
So it's in your best interest to make the
biggest components server components and
the smallest components client components
cuz those are the ones that get shipped to
the browser.
So it's really a different way of
thinking about how you build React apps.
Cuz I think in the past,
you have these pace components or
these layout components that fetch data,
and they pass the props down.
And you have these UI components, they
just receive props and they're stateless.
It's gonna be different now.
[LAUGH] You're gonna have small
components that do one thing.
They fetch the data, they use this
thing and their client components.
And you don't want to I think
what Next.js calls it poison,
you don't wanna poison your server
components by having it just like,
I gotta make this a whole
client component.
Cuz this one button down here my JSX
needs accesses something on a client.
It's like, well, why don't you make
that a component and abstract it away?
And then we don't have
to worry about that.
Because as you'll find out,
you can actually use client
components in server components and
the other way around without them messing
each other up if you do it the right way.
Yeah, so very good question,
very good observation.
And yes, that is the recommended approach.